docs/RUNTIME_MODES.md, before:

# Runtime Modes

Kaizen supports two runtime modes configured in `~/.kaizen/kaizen.json`:

- `manual` (default)
- `always-on` (opt-in)

Kaizen heartbeat runs in both modes and writes status to:

- `~/.kaizen/state/heartbeat/status.json`

## Manual mode

- Kaizen runs in the terminal foreground.
- Closing the terminal stops Kaizen.
- Best default for local-only work and lower exposure.

Use:

```bash
kaizen start
```

## Always-on mode

- Kaizen runs through OS service facilities.
- It keeps running after terminal close.
- Requires explicit risk acceptance during onboarding/setup.

Service backends:

- macOS: launchd user agent
- Linux: systemd user service
- Windows: scheduled task

Service lifecycle:

```bash
kaizen service install
kaizen service start
kaizen service status
kaizen service stop
kaizen service restart
kaizen service uninstall
```

## Full uninstall

Kaizen also supports full uninstall with mode-based depth:

```bash
kaizen uninstall --mode standard
```

Modes:

- `minimal`: remove service and launchers only.
- `standard` (default): minimal + remove install dir and `~/.kaizen`.
- `deep`: standard + remove configured workspace metadata folder (`<workspace>/.kaizen`).

Default behavior requires typed confirmation (`uninstall kaizen`), unless `--yes` is passed.

## Foreground worker mode

For debugging or temporary channel processing:

```bash
kaizen service run
```

This keeps worker execution tied to the current terminal session.

## Autonomy runtime modes

Autonomy is separate from service/manual runtime and is disabled by default.

- `queued` (default autonomy mode): runs explicit queue tasks only.
- `free-run` (optional): manual start only, bounded by turns and minutes.

Commands:

```bash
kaizen autonomy status
kaizen autonomy enable
kaizen autonomy start --mode queued --max-turns 5 --max-minutes 20
kaizen autonomy stop
```

Queue commands:

```bash
kaizen queue add --title "task title" --prompt "task prompt"
kaizen queue list
kaizen queue run-next
```

## Onboarding flags

Set mode non-interactively:

```bash
kaizen onboard --non-interactive --run-mode manual
```

```bash
kaizen onboard --non-interactive --run-mode always-on --accept-always-on-risk true
```

Auto-start behavior after onboarding/setup:

- default: enabled (`--auto-start true`)
- disable: `--no-auto-start` or `--auto-start false`
- if launch is not possible in the current environment, Kaizen prints a manual `kaizen start ...` fallback command.

Commit message:

feat: add release-based updater with notifier and update command

docs/RUNTIME_MODES.md, after:

# Runtime Modes

Kaizen supports two runtime modes configured in `~/.kaizen/kaizen.json`:

- `manual` (default)
- `always-on` (opt-in)

Kaizen heartbeat runs in both modes and writes status to:

- `~/.kaizen/state/heartbeat/status.json`

## Manual mode

- Kaizen runs in the terminal foreground.
- Closing the terminal stops Kaizen.
- Best default for local-only work and lower exposure.

Use:

```bash
kaizen start
```

## Always-on mode

- Kaizen runs through OS service facilities.
- It keeps running after terminal close.
- Requires explicit risk acceptance during onboarding/setup.

Service backends:

- macOS: launchd user agent
- Linux: systemd user service
- Windows: scheduled task

Service lifecycle:

```bash
kaizen service install
kaizen service start
kaizen service status
kaizen service stop
kaizen service restart
kaizen service uninstall
```

## Full uninstall

Kaizen also supports full uninstall with mode-based depth:

```bash
kaizen uninstall --mode standard
```

Modes:

- `minimal`: remove service and launchers only.
- `standard` (default): minimal + remove install dir and `~/.kaizen`.
- `deep`: standard + remove configured workspace metadata folder (`<workspace>/.kaizen`).

Default behavior requires typed confirmation (`uninstall kaizen`), unless `--yes` is passed.

## Update commands

Kaizen update checks are sourced from GitHub Releases (`Hainrixz/kaizen`) and cached for 24 hours.

```bash
kaizen update --check
kaizen update
```

Behavior:

- startup notifications are shown only on interactive commands (`kaizen`, `start`, `chat`, `ui`)
- `kaizen update` is manual (no silent auto-update)
- if service was running, update stops it first and restarts it by default
- use `--no-restart-service` to keep service stopped after update

## Foreground worker mode

For debugging or temporary channel processing:

```bash
kaizen service run
```

This keeps worker execution tied to the current terminal session.

## Autonomy runtime modes

Autonomy is separate from service/manual runtime and is disabled by default.

- `queued` (default autonomy mode): runs explicit queue tasks only.
- `free-run` (optional): manual start only, bounded by turns and minutes.

Commands:

```bash
kaizen autonomy status
kaizen autonomy enable
kaizen autonomy start --mode queued --max-turns 5 --max-minutes 20
kaizen autonomy stop
```

Queue commands:

```bash
kaizen queue add --title "task title" --prompt "task prompt"
kaizen queue list
kaizen queue run-next
```

## Onboarding flags

Set mode non-interactively:

```bash
kaizen onboard --non-interactive --run-mode manual
```

```bash
kaizen onboard --non-interactive --run-mode always-on --accept-always-on-risk true
```

Auto-start behavior after onboarding/setup:

- default: enabled (`--auto-start true`)
- disable: `--no-auto-start` or `--auto-start false`
- if launch is not possible in the current environment, Kaizen prints a manual `kaizen start ...` fallback command.
